---
layout: post
title: "C++ Renaissance - Return of the King"
description: ""
category: 
tags: []
---
{% include JB/setup %}

Talk: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xcwxGzbTyms
Sumup: http://www.alejandrosegovia.net/2011/09/08/herb-sutters-why-c-talk-sum-up/

The answer is performance per dollar(Perf/$).

For those who have been programming in C++ for long, how many times in
last 10 years have you been asked or have heard quesitons like, "Why
c++?", "You still code in C/C++?". With the rise of managed languages
in the last decade a key questions begin to be asked in sever
developer gorups and forums, is C/C++ interesting anymore? Is it only
meant for writing device drivers and low level uninteresting systems
code? Because we could do everything we could with managed
languages. That is the question that stood, large unas=nswered. 


Vocabulary: 

Let's define 3 aspects of performance that would be used throughout this post:

  Performance per Watt (Perf/W) - Driver at all scales - on die,
  mobile, desktop, datacenter

  Performance per Transistor (Perf/T) - There is a limit on processor
  resources- desktop, mobile. To do mor e, we have to do more with
  less.

  Performance per Cycle (Perf/C) - Bigger Experince on smaller
  hardware; Pushing envelope means evey cycle matters

The Lost Decade (1999-2009):

The last decade, 1999-2009, saw immense hype and adoption of managed
languages, Java and C#, where productivity was given much more
importance than performance. With the rise of these "coffe' based
languages we really started pushing the envelope trying to do
everything we could with managed code. We seemed to very willing to
accept the belief that mangaed languages could do everything that one
could do. Everyone has pretty much decided that the world of managed
code is far superior to the world of unmanaged code.

- TODO - more on why we didn't care about performance, becuase we had
  more power and memory

Windows Longhorn (which later became Windows Vista, many years later)
is the the poster child in the entire history of our industry for
pushing managed language to it's limits. It is probably the only such
large scale effort that tried to put managed code at the heart of an
operating system. In fact, all new Windows API were designed to be
managed. The belief was the managed languages are ready to hit prime
time which turned out to be wrong. Managed language could not meet the
rohbustness, performance requirements, servicability and deployibility
of of demanding applications like an operating system.


It is perfectly fine to put wrappers over native code for productivity
reasons but it wrong to think that one tool can solve all problems.

Mice No Good:

Last century we built software for keyboard and mouse and called it
good. The Lost decade saw zero to no innovaiton in user interfaces.

Innovation in user interface made star-trek and minority report
reality. We now have very immersive tablet applications where,
demading augmented reality applications like Word Lens (now Google
working on Glass) that would translate languages in real time, when
pointed by phone camera, and overlay it on top of it.

Herb Sutter in his article Free Lunch is Over - 

http://www.gotw.ca/publications/concurrency-ddj.htm

     Efficiency and performance optimization will get more, not less,
     important. Those languages that already lend themselves to heavy
     optimization will find new life; those that don’t will need to find
     ways to compete and become more efficient and optimizable. Expect
     long-term increased demand for performance-oriented languages and
     systems.


During the lost decade we didn't innovate in user experiences and
tried very hard to make managed code a single tools for all problem; A
hammer that made everything looked like a nail.

C++ Renaissance - Return of the King (2009-2019)

The C++ renaissance started with the realization that we need both
mannged and native code. The king that has always been an issues,
except during the lost decade, that king is "PERFORMANCE",
Perf/$(W|T|C). Performance matter is a lot of applications.

TODO - Where the focus is? Table

- C focused on effiency and flexibility and much on abstraction or
  productivity (the way we think about it today)
- C++ got abstraction at no/minimal cost

- C#, Java focused on productivy and a great job on abstraction and
  now also Generics, but at the expence of flexibility and
  efficiency. They were optimized for programmer's time.

First column (performance) has been KING since the very beginning.

Notes from the Web: 

Pete Brown  - Envangelist at Microsoft, author of many windows app develeopment books
  http://10rem.net/blog/2011/02/22/creating-an-internet-explorer-add-in-toolbar-button-using-cplusplus-and-atl

      Now, you can actually accomplish creating a basic add-in simply by
      storing a little hunk of script on the drive and adding the right
      registry keys. However, I specifically wanted to do this in C++. No,
      not because I hate myself, but because I'm starting to see a
      resurgence of interest in C++. You can create add-ins using .NET and
      Script, but both have significant limitations as well as performance
      concerns. If you want to write an add-in of any complexity, you'll
      almost certainly want to write it in C++. So, that's what I decided to
      do.


The Clang project: 

 - New open source c++ compiler

 - Apple and Google (one of the largest monolithic codebase in world)
   heavily investing. Great tools.

TODO - pics and facts from net. 

The newest compiler getting mindsharing and attention is C++ compiler. 


Mobile: 

We call them phones, but common, it's a small computers with a
cellular radio. Phone is an app. - Herb Sutter

Perf/W - battery - lower power, longer life
Perf/T - Size - amount of hardware you can have
Perf/C - experience - bigger experience on smaller hardware

Writing Apps for Smart Phones: 
 - TODO insert nice pic 

version 1 - iphone webapp, android Java
version 2 - objc, ndk

Facebook webapp vs native story. 

*Cost of Datacenter analysis: 

David Hamilton (Distinguishd Engineer AWS) - analysis of large
datacenter costs.

      "power is the second most important cost. Power efficiency is
      highly leveraged when looking at overall data center costs, it
      plays an important role in environmental stewardship, and it is
      one of the areas where substantial gains continue to look quite
      attainable. As a consequence, this is where I spend a
      considerable amount of my time – perhaps the majority – but we
      have to remember that servers still dominate the overall capital
      cost"
TODO - pie chart herb style

- Meme - Power is the biggest cost which he debunked
- Power cost is (power + cooling) 
- Hardware and power = 88%. Why is this interesting? 

- It means ~90% of the cost of your data center is directly related
  performance; perf/W, perf/T, perf/C. If you made you code half in
  space and time, so you need half the compute power you immediately
  take off 44% cost of a datacenter.

- This is so different from 1990s and 2000. 

- Hamilton's conclusion from 2 talks: 
  Enterprise vs Cloud

   - People(admin and programmer time) costs shift from top to nearly
     irrelevant. Don't even show up in the pie chart.

   - Work done/$ and work done/W are what really matters. Software
     issues dominate.

   - Expect high-scale service techniques spread to enterprise. What's
     happening to data center, expect these techniques to go back to
     servers and desktop.

Efficiency is king when it comes it managing 

C++ combats global warming - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FBWeO2HYEc0

    “My biggest contribution to the fight against global warming is C++’s
    efficiency: Just think if Google had to have twice as many server
    farms! Each uses as much energy as a small town. And it’s not just a
    factor of two… 
    
    Efficiency is not just running fast or running bigger
    programs, it’s also running using less resources.”

Slashdot article - http://linux.slashdot.org/story/11/06/29/1612220/can-ubuntu-linux-consume-less-power-than-windows 
When was the last time you saw that? 


Where bets are placed 
TODO - put chart from 31:00 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xcwxGzbTyms

Modern C++ 

End of Moore's Law 

Conclusion (TODO)
